Indefinite survival of skin allografts in adult thymectomized, antilymphocyte serum-treated mice given bone marrow and thymus grafts of donor origin: tolerance induction by donor bone marrow and thymus.BACKGROUND: Perigraft immunosuppression with antilymphocyte serum (ALS) and postgraft infusion of donor bone marrow cells (BMC), which induces allograft unresponsiveness in a class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-disparate mouse combination, is much less effective in class I and II MHC-disparate strain combinations. Because the thymus plays a central role in the maturation, differentiation, and education of T lymphocytes, which are the principal mediator of allograft responses, we examined whether transplantation of donor-specific thymus combined with adult thymectomy of recipients enhances the tolerogenic effect of ALS and donor BMC infusion in a strongly histoincompatible class I and II MHC-disparate DBA/2-to-B6AF1 mouse strain combination. METHODS: Adult thymectomy was performed 4 weeks before grafting. B6AF1 mice received ALS (days -1 and 2), skin allografts (day 0), and BMC and/or thymus grafts (ThyTx) (day 7). Flow cytometric analysis was used to detect donor cells in tolerant mice. Limiting dilution assay was used to calculate the frequencies of precursor cytotoxic T lymphocytes against donor and third-party alloantigens. The presence of suppressor cells was determined by in vivo adoptive transfer assay and in vitro coculture mixed lymphocyte culture. RESULTS: When adult thymectomy and postgraft donor ThyTx were combined with ALS and donor BMC, DBA/2 allograft survival was prolonged with all grafts surviving for &gt;122 days. Third-party (DBA/1) or recipient ThyTx was not effective. The tolerant mice accepted the second donor skin allografts but acutely rejected the third-party grafts. No significant chimerism was detected. Marked reduction of precursor cytotoxic T lymphocyte frequencies continued only against donor alloantigens after second donor and third-party skin grafting. No suppressor cell activity was detected. Immunopathological analysis revealed that the cells in the ThyTx of tolerant mice are of donor origin. CONCLUSION: Donor ThyTx combined with donor BMC infusion in adult thymectomized, ALS-treated mice induced clonal deletion of donor-reactive T cells.
