Glucocorticoid treatment--effect on adrenal medullary catecholamine production.Glucocorticoid and epinephrine are important stress hormones secreted from the adrenal gland during critical illness. Adrenal glucocorticoid stimulates phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT) to convert norepinephrine to epinephrine in the adrenal medulla. Glucocorticoid is sometimes used in catecholamine-resistant septic shock in critically ill patients. By suppressing adrenal glucocorticoid production, glucocorticoid therapy might also reduce the secretion of epinephrine during stress. To investigate this, we used a mouse model subjected to glucocorticoid therapy under basal conditions (experiment 1) and during stress (experiment 2). In experiment 1, pellets containing 0% to 8% dexamethasone were implanted subcutaneously in mice for 4 weeks. In experiment 2, animals received 14 days of intraperitoneal injections of normal saline, low- or high-dose dexamethasone, followed by 2 h of restraint. We found that in experiment 1, adrenal corticosterone did not differ with dexamethasone treatment. Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase messenger RNA levels and adrenal catecholamines were highest in the 8% dexamethasone group. Compared with experiment 1, restrained control mice in experiment 2 had high adrenal corticosterone, which decreased with dexamethasone. Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase messenger RNA content doubled with restraint but decreased with dexamethasone treatment. As in experiment 1, adrenal catecholamine content increased significantly with dexamethasone treatment. We conclude that without stress, when adrenocorticotropic hormone is low, high doses of exogenous dexamethasone stimulate PNMT and catecholamine synthesis, likely independently of adrenal corticosterone concentration. After stress, adrenocorticotropic hormone levels are elevated, and exogenous dexamethasone suppresses endogenous corticosterone and PNMT production. Nonetheless, catecholamines increase, possibly due to direct neural stimulation, which may override the hormonal regulation of epinephrine synthesis during stress.
