Adiponectin levels are reduced, independent of polymorphisms in the adiponectin gene, after supplementation with alpha-linolenic acid among healthy adults.Our first aim was to determine whether an isocaloric intervention using alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) in the form of flaxseed oil would alter adiponectin levels among overweight, otherwise healthy, males and females, and our second aim was to test for any potential modification of this intervention by 2 single nucleotide polymorphisms (276 and 45) in the adiponectin gene. Subjects included healthy adult males and females (approximately 81% female; average age, 38 years) with increased waist circumference (mean, 99 cm) and body mass index (mean, 30 kg/m(2)) who were free of chronic disease, not taking medications, and sedentary. Subjects met weekly with a registered dietician for 8 weeks. The control subjects (n = 27) were instructed not to alter their habitual diet and the ALA group (n = 30) was instructed to follow an enriched ALA diet by using flaxseed oil capsules (increasing ALA to 5% of total energy intake) and to lower their dietary fat consumption by a commensurate amount. Diets were analyzed using the Food Intake and Analysis System (v. 3.0, University of Texas School of Public Health, 1998). Fasting blood samples were obtained before and after the 8-week intervention. We found significant decreases (P = .02) in adiponectin (10.12 microg/mL pre, 9.23 microg/mL post) in the ALA group as compared with the control group (7.93 microg/mL pre, 8.10 microg/mL post) after the intervention. We also saw a decline in adiponectin in all genotype groups with the greatest decline among those carrying the rare T allele of single nucleotide polymorphism 276. There were no significant changes in fasting insulin, glucose, or quantitative insulin sensitivity check index values as a result of this intervention. In conclusion, this study suggests that supplementing with ALA for 8 weeks may lower adiponectin levels among healthy individuals, and this effect appears to be independent of polymorphisms in the adiponectin gene. Although the change in adiponectin in response to the omega-3 fatty acids was not accompanied by any change in glucose, insulin, or quantitative insulin sensitivity check index, long-term implications of such a decrease should be considered in future studies.
