Improved MS/MS analysis of succinylacetone extracted from dried blood spots when combined with amino acids and acylcarnitine butyl esters.BACKGROUND: The utilization of succinylacetone (SUAC) as the primary metabolic marker for tyrosinemia Type I is now well known, thus new methods have been developed to analyze SUAC as a first tier test in newborn screening. One approach is to prepare a SUAC hydrazine derivative from the dried blood spots (DBS) previously utilized in the extraction of acylcarnitine (AC) and amino acids (AA). The final derivatized products of SUAC, AA and AC are combined in a single tandem mass spectrometric (MS/MS) analysis. However, butyl esterification techniques may result in contamination of underivatized acylcarnitines by as much as 20%. We have developed a simple wash step to improve the combined analysis of SUAC, AA and AC in DBS by MS/MS. METHODS: AA and AC were extracted with methanol containing labeled internal standard from 3.2mm punches taken from the DBS specimen. The previously extracted blood spot that remains after removal of the methanol extraction solvent was used in the preparation of SUAC with and without additional washing of the blood spot. The butyl ester eluates of AA and AC, and SUAC hydrazine derivatives were recombined and measured by MS/MS. RESULTS: Three additional methanol wash steps of the remaining DBS punches prior to SUAC derivatization reduced the presence of underivatized acylcarnitines, resulting in a 4-fold reduction of underivatized palmitoylcarnitine. Palmitoylcarnitine butyl ester is detected at m/z 456 while the underivatized species is detected at m/z 400, which is also the mass of dodecanoylcarnitine butyl ester. The linearity of the SUAC assay was unchanged by the additional wash steps. For butyl esterification methods, the preferred analytic procedure, the presence of AC can compromise the results of a newborn screen for the actual concentrations of acylcarnitines. It is essential to remove any underivatized acylcarnitines prior to SUAC analysis. CONCLUSION: The additional methanol wash steps did not alter SUAC assay results but did remove underivatized acylcarnitines which could result in the incorrect quantification of acylcarnitines.
