Topical aminolaevulinic acid- and aminolaevulinic acid methyl ester-based photodynamic therapy with red and violet light: influence of wavelength on pain and erythema.BACKGROUND: Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is based on the combination of an exogenously administered precursor of photosensitizer [protoporphyrin IX (PpIX)] synthesis and exposure to light. Choosing the optimal wavelength is important. Red light penetrates deeper into tissue, while violet light is more efficient in activating PpIX but does not penetrate so deeply. OBJECTIVES: We studied PpIX formation and the PDT effect after application to human skin of creams containing aminolaevulinic acid (ALA) and aminolaevulinic acid methyl ester (MAL). The aim of the study was to investigate whether the wavelength of the light used has an influence on pain sensations during topical PDT with the different prodrugs. METHODS: ALA cream (10%) and MAL cream (10%) were topically applied on the skin of 10 healthy volunteers. After 24 h the application site was exposed to 8 mW cm(-2) violet laser or to 100 mW cm(-2) red laser light. The erythema index was monitored up to 24 h after light exposure. For the first time the pain during topical ALA- and MAL-PDT was assessed by measuring the time taken for pain to occur. Also, for the first time, the intensities of the light sources were calibrated so as to have the same relative quantum efficiency. Results The pain sensation during ALA-PDT with red light came 22 s sooner than during ALA-PDT with violet light, which is statistically significant (P &lt; 0.05). Moreover, ALA-PDT with red light gave stronger and more persistent erythema than ALA-PDT with violet light. ALA induced about three times more PpIX than MAL. No statistically significant differences were found for erythema, or for the time for pain to occur, in the case of MAL-PDT with red vs. violet light. CONCLUSIONS: Topical ALA-PDT with violet light allows longer exposure times before pain is induced and gives less erythema as compared with topical ALA-PDT with red light.
