Effect of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor on the induction of unresponsiveness by lymphoid cells.Skin grafts can be significantly prolonged in ALS-treated mice by the injection of 25 x 10(6) donor bone marrow cells or 50 x 10(6) spleen cells. Lymph node cells and thymocytes are only minimally effective in prolonging grafts. The effect of a hematopoietic growth factor, granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) was studied in this model of unresponsiveness. C3H/He lymphoid cell donors were treated with GM-CSF. Either normal or GM-CSF-treated cells were injected into ALS-treated B6AF1 mice grafted with C3H/He skin. GM-CSF treatment significantly augmented the effect of marrow in prolonging graft survival at doses of 1 to 25 x 10(6) cells. In contrast, GM-CSF had no effect on the graft-prolonging effect of spleen cells when 50 x 10(6) cells were given. When the dose of cells was reduced to 25 x 10(6), graft survival in the group given GM-CSF-treated cells was prolonged compared with survival in the group given normal cells. Grafts in the group given GM-CSF-treated lymph node cells were rejected in sensitized fashion. When marrow and spleen are separated on a Percoll gradient, the cell active in promoting graft survival is recovered primarily in the 52.5% fraction. The graft-prolonging effect of the 52.5% marrow fraction was not affected by GM-CSF treatment. In contrast, GM-CSF-treated marrow cells in the 60% fraction significantly prolonged graft survival, while normal marrow cells in this fraction had no effect on graft survival. GM-CSF-treated spleen cells in the 52.5% and 60% fractions significantly decreased graft survival compared with normal cells when given at a dose equal to the number of cells recovered from 50 x 10(6) cells. When the dose of fractionated spleen cells was reduced, GM-CSF-treated spleen cells were more effective than normal cells in prolonging graft survival. These results indicate that GM-CSF activates a cell in marrow that promotes graft survival. This cell is recovered in the 60% Percoll fraction. In contrast, GM-CSF appears to affect two cell populations in spleen, one beneficial and one detrimental to graft survival. The predominant effect depends on the dose of spleen cells that is given.
