The effect of substrate, ADP and uncoupler on the respiration of tomato pollen during incubation in vitro at moderately high temperature.Pollen of tomato cv. Supermarmande was collected from greenhouse-grown plants at various intervals throughout the year and arbitrarily classified as of high, medium or low respiratory activity on the basis of CO(2) production during 8 h incubation in vitro at 30 degrees C, a temperature that is considered to be moderately high for tomato fruit set. After an initial burst of respiration during the first stage of hydration at 30 degrees C (&gt;1 h), the respiration rate of pollen of all three categories declined, the decrease being greater in the lots with a low or medium respiratory activity than in the high category. During hydration (10 min after the start of incubation), the addition of succinate or reduced beta-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) to the substrate increased the respiratory rate of slowly-respiring pollen more than that of fast-respiring pollen, but carbonyl cyanide 3-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP) and adenosine 5'-diphosphate (ADP) had less effect. After 1-4 h incubation, the respiration rate of the slow- or medium-respiring pollen lots had decreased, but was stimulated by succinate or NADH, and to a lesser degree by ADP. By 7 h, the respiration rate of all pollen lots had declined and was stimulated less by substrate, ADP or CCCP. The oxidation of NADH by tomato pollen contrasts with the failure of other pollen species to utilize this substrate; moreover, a synergistic effect of NADH and succinate was consistently observed. We conclude that the decline in respiration during incubation for up to 4 h at 30 degrees C may reflect a lack of respiratory substrate. After 7 h, however, the decreased response to substrate indicates a loss of mitochondrial integrity or an accumulation of metabolic inhibitors. It is concluded that at 30 degrees C (a moderately high temperature for tomato pollen), the initially high rate of respiration leads to exhaustion of the endogenous respiratory substrates (particularly in pollen with low to medium respiratory activity), but subsequently to ageing and a loss of mitochondrial activity.
