Utilization of AA by Hispanic and non-Hispanic white clients receiving outpatient alcohol treatment.OBJECTIVE: Research indicates that Hispanic clients are less likely than non-Hispanic white (NHW) clients to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) after treatment. This study examined how, if at all, the nature of commitment to prescribed AA-related behaviors after treatment differed between Hispanic and non-Hispanic whites, and how such behaviors were associated with drinking reductions. METHOD: This retrospective study was conducted using Project MATCH data collected at the Albuquerque clinical research unit. Study aims were investigated using the Form 90, the Alcoholics Anonymous Inventory and the Religious Background and Behavior measures. A total of 100 Hispanic and 105 non-Hispanic clients were randomized to receive either Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), Motivational Enhancement Therapy (MET) or Twelve-Step Facilitation (TSF) therapy, and findings were divided according to whether clients were encouraged to attend AA (TSF) or not (CBT and MET). RESULTS: Six months after treatment, Hispanic clients assigned to TSF reported significantly less AA attendance relative to NHW clients in TS, and no differences in AA attendance rates were found between Hispanics encouraged and not encouraged to attend AA (TSF vs CBT and MET). Among TSF clients, however, no ethnic differences were found in rates of specific AA-related behaviors. Controlling for intake beliefs,  God Consciousness  after treatment was significantly higher for Hispanic relative to NHW clients, and a main effect of treatment was also obtained (TSF vs CBT and MET). Specific AA-related practices were not associated with increased abstinence, in general. CONCLUSIONS: Despite less frequent AA attendance, Hispanic clients showed increase in AA commitment comparable to that of NHW clients. It thus appears that differential commitment to AA does not explain why Hispanic clients report less frequent AA attendance but equal benefit, relative to NHW clients.
