Accreditation as an alternative to specialty recognition.The Commission on Dental Accreditation does not currently accredit postdoctoral training in general anesthesia. This is related to the traditional linkage of accreditation of postdoctoral training programs to ADA specialty recognition. The aforementioned ADA Guidelines are important because they provide the foundation for the continued use of sedation and general anesthesia within dentistry. The one mechanism that would  ensure safety and effective use,  maintain  a strong educational foundation,  provide  access to adequate training ... develop programs at the postgraduate level  and support expansion of both basic and clinical research is CDA accreditation of postdoctoral programs. Prior to 1991, hen general anesthesia training was acquired by dentists primarily through accredited medical programs, there was little need for anything more than guidelines to protect the public. With the development of non-accredited dental anesthesiology programs in accredited dental schools (primarily in the late 1980's) and the loss of access to general anesthesia training in accredited medical anesthesiology residency programs in the summer of 1991, primary responsibility for all general anesthesia training of dentists shifted to organized dentistry. However, the ADA House declined to recognize dental anesthesiology as a dental specialty on three separate occasions even though the ADA Council on Dental Education felt all requirements were met and favorably recommended specialty recognition in all three instances. Specialty recognition would have provided the needed accreditation mechanism to validate dentistry's continued use of deep sedation and general anesthesia by those practitioners not classified as oral and maxillofacial surgeons. As an alternative to the specialty recognition process and in view of the need to accredit postdoctoral general anesthesia training for dentists, the American Society of Dentist Anesthesiologists has recently requested the CDA offer accreditation for these dental programs. To address this issue and those of other non-ADA-recognized disciplines, the CDA is currently in the initial stages of developing requirements for accrediting non-ADA recognized postdoctoral training programs. This material will be circulated to communities of interest for their input. Details of the process will be forthcoming from ADA sources in the near future.
