Induction of tolerance to skin allografts by intrathymic injection of donor splenocytes. Effect of donor-recipient strain combination and supplemental rapamycin.The effect of donor-recipient strain combination and supplemental rapamycin (Rapa) on tolerance induction by intrathymic (IT) injection of donor splenocytes was examined in a mouse skin allograft model. In an MHC class I-mismatched C3H/He skin to (C57BL/6 x A)F1 (B6AF1) mouse combination, IT injection of 50 x 10(6) donor splenocytes with transient immunosuppression by rabbit anti-mouse lymphocyte serum (ALS) induced significant prolongation of skin allograft survival with a median survival time (MST) of 115 days versus an MST of 24.5 days in controls given ALS alone. With an additional short course of supplemental Rapa treatment at a dose of 1.5 mg/kg i.p. every other day from day 0 to 12, all C3H/He skin allografts survived indefinitely (&gt; 350 days) in ALS-treated, donor splenocyte intrathymically injected B6AF1 recipient mice. Tolerance was antigen-specific, since the second donor-type skin allografts were accepted while third-party skin allografts were acutely rejected in these mice bearing long-term C3H/He skin allografts. In MHC class I- and II-disparate (DBA/2 to B6AF1) and fully MHC-incompatible (AKR to B6) strain combinations, IT injection of donor splenocytes and ALS treatment failed to prolong skin allograft survival over ALS controls. When supplemental Rapa was used, long-term skin allograft acceptance was observed with an MST of 127 days for the DBA/2 to B6AF1 combination and 70 days for the AKR to B6 combination. In contrast, supplemental treatment with cyclosporine was not effective in these combinations, which suggests that supplemental Rapa may have a unique effect in augmenting IT tolerance induction. Thymectomy within 7 days after IT injection significantly shortened the allograft survival, which suggests that interaction of the host thymus and the injected donor splenocytes, which takes place early after IT injection, plays an important role in the induction of allograft tolerance in this model.
