Severe asthma with markedly increased asbestos of 2 types &amp; TXB2, and markedly reduced acetylcholine, DHEA &amp; drug uptake in parts of upper lungs, &amp; similar abnormalities at respiratory &amp; cardiac center of medulla oblongata: complete elimination of this asthma within 15 days using one optimal dose of astragalus &amp; application of strong red light &amp; EMF neutralizer on respiratory centers of abnormal medulla oblongata.When the window of an Asbestos-contaminated room from a broken ceiling was opened wide, A 73 year-old male physician of Oriental origin, who was sitting in the next room, suddenly developed a severe asthma attack, which did not stop by the use of a hand-held Albuterol inhaler. Temporary relief was obtained only by using a Compressor-Nebulizer (Inspiration 626 with Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution 0.083%). During the attack, abnormal areas were discovered at the upper lobes of both lungs, where Thromboxane B2 (TXB2) was markedly increased to 500 ng (BDORT units) (the rest of the lung had about 2.5 ng), 2 types of Asbestos (Chrysotile and Crocidolite) were abnormally increased to 0.120-0.135 mg, (BDORT units) Acetylcholine was markedly reduced to 0.5 ng (the rest of the lung was low, about 100 ng), DHEA was extremely reduced to 1 ng (the rest of the lung had about 52 ng), and telomere was less than 1 yg (= 10(-24) g). Bacterial &amp; viral infections were also present in these abnormal areas, but no antibiotics entered the abnormal parts of the lungs. Therefore, one optimal dose of Astragalus was given once, which resulted in a rapid continuous excretion of large amounts of the above 2 types of Asbestos &amp; TXB2 in urine &amp; sputum, and Asthma symptoms reduced slightly in severity. Additional acupuncture &amp; shiatsu given on all the known acupuncture points for lung disease only created slight, temporary improvement. Then, the respiratory &amp; cardiac center of the Medulla Oblongata was found to have similar abnormalities as the lungs. Therefore, 100 mW output of Light Emitting Diode of red spectra (650 nm center spectrum) was projected on the abnormal area of the medulla oblongata on the back of the head. This resulted drug uptake of on and off and significantly reduced difficulty of breathing. Additional application of the EMF Neutralizer on the abnormal area of the Medulla Oblongata for 3 hours resulted in continuous drug uptake and complete disappearance of asthma. As a result of one optimal dose of Astragalus, the remaining Asbestos in the lungs &amp; medulla oblongata was completely excreted in the urine and Sputum in 2 weeks. Then, even when the patient entered the Asbestos-contaminated room and slept there every day without opening the window, no asthma attack occurred even as late as 5 months later.
