Tentative identification of arterial baroreceptors associated with arteriovenous anastomoses.Nerve endings of the trigeminal nerve were examined in the lip, nostril, upper jaw and supraorbital skin of cat by the horseradish peroxidase (HRP) tracing method. Wheatgerm agglutinin-HRP (WGA-HRP) as injected into the spinal trigeminal nucleus was transported transganglionically to nerve endings. The present study deals with presumptive baroreceptive nerve endings found on arteriovenous anastomoses and on some other large arteries. By light microscopy HRP-labeled, complexly arborized nerve endings were found on the walls of arteries located deep in the subcutaneous tissue of the lip and nostril. These arteries were identified in serial sections to be an arterial segment of an arteriovenous anastomosis. By electron microscopy characteristic nerve endings were located in the adventitia and partly extended into the adjacent connective tissue of the arterial wall. These terminals had no connective tissue capsule. Axon terminals were somewhat enlarged (1-2 microns in diameter) and extended through bundles of collagen fibrils. The terminals contained an abundance of mitochondria and some vesicles. Axon terminals were typically covered by thin Schwann cell processes, but parts of the axolemma were sometimes devoid of such Schwann cell coverings, being invested only by basal laminae. Cell bodies of Schwann cells were located apart from axons. These light and electron microscopic features of the endings resembled those of other well-defined baroreceptors reported in the carotid sinus, aortic arch and endocardium, as well as of Ruffini terminals and Golgi tendon organs, suggesting that they would be baroreceptors of arteriovenous anastomosis. In addition HRP-labeled single nerve fibers with varicosities were found in the walls of some large arteries in the facial skin. By electron microscopy, such a HRP-positive nerve fiber contained some mitochondria and vesicles in varicosities and coursed with a bundle of HRP-negative fine fibers in the adventitia of arteries. These HRP-labeled single fibers were considered to be sensory derived from trigeminal nerves.
