ADA members weigh in on perceptions of the ADA and association priorities.BACKGROUND: The American Dental Association conducted the 2000 Membership Needs and Opinions Survey to evaluate the professional needs and personal perceptions of ADA members on selected topics. METHODS: A questionnaire was sent to a sample of 6,310 ADA members in January 2000 with follow-up mailings in February, March and April 2000. Data collection was completed in July 2000. The survey included questions on critical professional issues, perceptions of the American Dental Association and its priorities. A total of 3,558 surveys were received for an adjusted response rate of 59.5 percent. Only professionally active dentists who were ADA members were included in the sampling frame. RESULTS: Members evaluated statements about the American Dental Association, revealing their perceptions of the ADA on key issues. Findings showed strong support for the ADA Seal program, agreement that the ADA enhances the integrity and ethics of the profession and that the ADA is the premier professional association for dentists. Findings also provided information regarding the relative importance of ADA priorities by allocating  dues dollars  in $5 increments. The highest priorities were  providing continuing education to dentists,   lobbying members of Congress and federal regulatory agencies  and  influencing national public health policy.  CONCLUSIONS: ADA members, both new and established dentists, had positive perceptions of the Association and its programs. Although there was general agreement between these groups concerning ADA priorities, there was a substantial difference between some subgroups (especially graduate students and federally employed dentists) and the overall membership on the issue of changes in the licensure process to facilitate dentists' freedom of movement. PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS: The Association should continue to take into account the membership's perceptions of the ADA and its priorities, as well as note issues of special interest to selected membership subgroups, in the planning and implementation of Association activities.
