Bidirectional roles of the brain 2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycerol in the centrally administered vasopressin-induced adrenomedullary outflow in rats.Previously, we reported that intracerebroventricularly (i.c.v.) administered arginine-vasopressin evokes the secretion of noradrenaline and adrenaline from adrenal medulla through the brain phospholipase C- and diacylglycerol-mediated and cyclooxygenase-mediated mechanisms in rats. Diacylglycerol can be hydrolyzed by diacylglycerol lipase to 2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycerol, which may be further degradated by monoacylglycerol lipase to free arachidonic acid, a representative substrate of cyclooxygenase. Recently, 2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycerol has been recognized as a major endocannabinoid, which can modulate synaptic transmission in the brain. In the present experiment, therefore, we examined (1) a role of the brain 2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycerol as a precursor of arachidonic acid in the centrally administered vasopressin-induced elevation of plasma noradrenaline and adrenaline, and (2) a regulatory role of the brain 2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycerol as an endocannabinoid on the vasopressin-induced response, using urethane-anesthetized rats. The vasopressin (0.2 nmol/animal, i.c.v.)-induced elevation of plasma catecholamines was reduced by RHC-80267 (diacylglycerol lipase inhibitor) (1.3 and 2.6 micromol/animal, i.c.v.) and also reduced by MAFP (monoacylglycerol lipase inhibitor) (0.7 and 1.4 micromol/animal, i.c.v.). MAFP (1.4 micromol/animal, i.c.v.) also attenuated the 2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycerol (0.5 micromol/animal, i.c.v.)-induced elevation of plasma catecholamines. AM 251 (cannabinoid CB(1) receptor antagonist) (90 and 180 nmol/animal, i.c.v.) potentiated the vasopressin (0.2 nmol/animal, i.c.v.)-induced response, while AM 630 (cannabinoid CB(2) receptor antagonist) (198 and 793 nmol/animal, i.c.v.) was largely ineffective. In addition, WIN 55212-2 (cannabinoid CB receptor agonist) (188 and 470 nmol/animal, i.c.v.) dose-dependently reduced the vasopressin-induced response. These results suggest that the brain 2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycerol generated from diacylglycerol plays a role as a precursor of arachidonic acid in the centrally administered vasopressin-induced activation of the adrenomedullary outflow, and also negatively regulates the peptide-induced central response through the brain cannabinoid CB(1) receptors in rats.
